pub_date	title	venue	excerpt	citation	url_slug	paper_url
2018-03-07  Uncovering and deciphering the pro-invasive role of HACE1 in melanoma cells.  Cell Death Differ.  HACE1 promoted melanoma cell migration and adhesion in vitro and was required for mouse lung colonisation by melanoma cells in vivo.  El-Hachem N, Habel N, Naiken T, Bzioueche H, Cheli Y, Beranger GE, Jaune E, Rouaud F, Nottet N, Reinier F, Gaudel C, Colosetti P, Bertolotto C, Ballotti R. El-Hachem http://fred3ric.github.io/files/El-Hachem-HACE1.pdf
2017-07-28	Copy Number Changes Identified Using Whole Exome Sequencing in Nonsyndromic Cleft Lip and Palate in a Honduran Population	Birth Defects Res.	WES was performed on two to four members of 27 multiplex Honduran families. CNCs were identified using two algorithms, CoNIFER and XHMM. Priority was given to CNCs that were identified in more than one patient and had variant frequencies of less than 5% in reference data sets	Cai Y, Patterson KE, Reinier F, Keesecker SE, Blue E, Bamshad M, Haddad J Jr.	Cai-Y	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2017-07-28-Cai-Y.pdf
2017-04-11	Population- and individual-specific regulatory variation in Sardinia	Nat Genet.	Genetic studies of complex traits have mainly identified associations with noncoding variants. To further determine the contribution of regulatory variation, we combined whole-genome and transcriptome data for 624 individuals from Sardinia to identify common and rare variants that influence gene expression and splicing. We identified 21,183 expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and 6,768 splicing quantitative trait loci (sQTLs), including 619 new QTLs. We identified high-frequency QTLs and found evidence of selection near genes involved in malarial resistance and increased multiple sclerosis risk, reflecting the epidemiological history of Sardinia. Using family relationships, we identified 809 segregating expression outliers (median z score of 2.97), averaging 13.3 genes per individual. Outlier genes were enriched for proximal rare variants, providing a new approach to study large-effect regulatory variants and their relevance to traits. Our results provide insight into the effects of regulatory variants and their relationship to population history and individual genetic risk.	Pala M, Zappala Z, Marongiu M, Li X, Davis JR, Cusano R, Crobu F, Kukurba KR, Gloudemans MJ, Reinier F, Berutti R, Piras MG, Mulas A, Zoledziewska M, Marongiu M, Sorokin EP, Hess GT, Smith KS, Busonero F, Maschio A, Steri M, Sidore C, et al.	Pala-M	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2017-04-11-Pala-M.pdf
2017-03-08	Molecular outcomes, clinical consequences, and genetic diagnosis of Oculocutaneous Albinism in Pakistani population	Sci Rep.	Nonsyndromic oculocutaneous Albinism (nsOCA) is clinically characterized by the loss of pigmentation in the skin, hair, and iris. OCA is amongst the most common causes of vision impairment in children. To date, pathogenic variants in six genes have been identified in individuals with nsOCA. Here, we determined the identities, frequencies, and clinical consequences of OCA alleles in 94 previously unreported Pakistani families. Combination of Sanger and Exome sequencing revealed 38 alleles, including 22 novel variants, segregating with nsOCA phenotype in 80 families. Variants of TYR and OCA2 genes were the most common cause of nsOCA, occurring in 43 and 30 families, respectively. Twenty-two novel variants include nine missense, four splice site, two non-sense, one insertion and six gross deletions. In vitro studies revealed retention of OCA proteins harboring novel missense alleles in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of transfected cells. Exon-trapping assays with constructs containing splice site alleles revealed errors in splicing. As eight alleles account for approximately 56% (95% CI: 46.52-65.24%) of nsOCA cases, primarily enrolled from Punjab province of Pakistan, hierarchical strategies for variant detection would be feasible and cost-efficient genetic tests for OCA in families with similar origin. Thus, we developed Tetra-primer ARMS assays for rapid, reliable, reproducible and economical screening of most of these common alleles.	Shahzad M, Yousaf S, Waryah YM, Gul H, Kausar T, Tariq N, Mahmood U, Ali M, Khan MA, Waryah AM, Shaikh RS, Riazuddin S, Ahmed ZM; University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics (UW CMG) Consortium..	Shahza-M	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2017-03-08-Shahza-M.pdf
2015-09-15	Genome sequencing elucidates Sardinian genetic architecture and augments association analyses for lipid and blood inflammatory markers	Nat Genet.	We report _17.6 million genetic variants from whole-genome sequencing of 2,120 Sardinians; 22% are absent from previous sequencing-based compilations and are enriched for predicted functional consequences. Furthermore, _76,000 variants common in our sample (frequency >5%) are rare elsewhere (<0.5% in the 1000 Genomes Project). We assessed the impact of these variants on circulating lipid levels and five inflammatory biomarkers. We observe 14 signals, including 2 major new loci, for lipid levels and 19 signals, including 2 new loci, for inflammatory markers. The new associations would have been missed in analyses based on 1000 Genomes Project data, underlining the advantages of large-scale sequencing in this founder population.	Sidore C, Busonero F, Maschio A, Porcu E, Naitza S, Zoledziewska M, Mulas A, Pistis G, Steri M, Danjou F, Kwong A, Ortega Del Vecchyo VD, Chiang CWK, Bragg-Gresham J, Pitzalis M, Nagaraja R, Tarrier B, Brennan C, Uzzau S, Fuchsberger C, Atzeni R, Reinier F, et al.	Sidore-C	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2015-09-15-Sidore-C.pdf
2015-09-10	Mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid features and lipodystrophy (MDPL) syndrome in the context of inherited lipodystrophies	Metabolism.	We report here the clinical description of a woman with a rare severe lipodystrophic and progeroid syndrome associated with hypertriglyceridemia and diabetes whose genetic bases have been clarified through whole-exome sequencing (WES) analysis.	Reinier F, Zoledziewska M, Hanna D, Smith JD, Valentini M, Zara I, Berutti R, Sanna S, Oppo M, Cusano R, Satta R, Montesu MA, Jones C, Cerimele D, Nickerson DA, Angius A, Cucca F, Cottoni F, Crisponi L.	Reinier-F	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2015-09-10-Reinier-F.pdf
2015-07-15	The Genetic Basis of Mendelian Phenotypes: Discoveries, Challenges, and Opportunities	Am J Hum Genet.	Discovering the genetic basis of a Mendelian phenotype establishes a causal link between genotype and phenotype, making possible carrier and population screening and direct diagnosis. Such discoveries also contribute to our knowledge of gene function, gene regulation, development, and biological mechanisms that can be used for developing new therapeutics. As of February 2015, 2,937 genes underlying 4,163 Mendelian phenotypes have been discovered, but the genes underlying _50% (i.e., 3,152) of all known Mendelian phenotypes are still unknown, and many more Mendelian conditions have yet to be recognized. This is a formidable gap in biomedical knowledge. Accordingly, in December 2011, the NIH established the Centers for Mendelian Genomics (CMGs) to provide the collaborative framework and infrastructure necessary for undertaking large-scale whole-exome sequencing and discovery of the genetic variants responsible for Mendelian phenotypes. In partnership with 529 investigators from 261 institutions in 36 countries, the CMGs assessed 18,863 samples from 8,838 families representing 579 known and 470 novel Mendelian phenotypes as of January 2015. This collaborative effort has identified 956 genes, including 375 not previously associated with human health, that underlie a Mendelian phenotype. These results provide insight into study design and analytical strategies, identify novel mechanisms of disease, and reveal the extensive clinical variability of Mendelian phenotypes. Discovering the gene underlying every Mendelian phenotype will require tackling challenges such as worldwide ascertainment and phenotypic characterization of families affected by Mendelian conditions, improvement in sequencing and analytical techniques, and pervasive sharing of phenotypic and genomic data among researchers, clinicians, and families.	Chong JX, Buckingham KJ, Jhangiani SN, Boehm C, Sobreira N, Smith JD, Harrell TM, McMillin MJ, Wiszniewski W, Gambin T, Coban Akdemir ZH, Doheny K, Scott AF, Avramopoulos D, Chakravarti A, Hoover-Fong J, Mathews D, Witmer PD, Ling H, Hetrick K, Watkins L, Patterson KE, et al.	Chong-JX	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2015-07-15-Chong-JX.pdf
2015-05-11	Autosomal-Dominant Multiple Pterygium Syndrome Is Caused by Mutations in MYH3	Am J Hum Genet. 	Multiple pterygium syndrome (MPS) is a phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous group of rare Mendelian conditions characterized by multiple pterygia, scoliosis, and congenital contractures of the limbs. MPS typically segregates as an autosomal-recessive disorder, but rare instances of autosomal-dominant transmission have been reported. Whereas several mutations causing recessive MPS have been identified, the genetic basis of dominant MPS remains unknown. We identified four families affected by dominantly transmitted MPS characterized by pterygia, camptodactyly of the hands, vertebral fusions, and scoliosis. Exome sequencing identified predicted protein-altering mutations in embryonic myosin heavy chain (MYH3) in three families. MYH3 mutations underlie distal arthrogryposis types 1, 2A, and 2B, but all mutations reported to date occur in the head and neck domains. In contrast, two of the mutations found to cause MPS in this study occurred in the tail domain. The phenotypic overlap among persons with MPS, coupled with physical findings distinct from other conditions caused by mutations in MYH3, suggests that the developmental mechanism underlying MPS differs from that of other conditions and/or that certain functions of embryonic myosin might be perturbed by disruption of specific residues and/or domains. Moreover, the vertebral fusions in persons with MPS, coupled with evidence of MYH3 expression in bone, suggest that embryonic myosin plays a role in skeletal development.	Chong JX, Burrage LC, Beck AE, Marvin CT, McMillin MJ, Shively KM, Harrell TM, Buckingham KJ, Bacino CA, Jain M, Alanay Y, Berry SA, Carey JC, Gibbs RA, Lee BH, Krakow D, Shendure J, Nickerson DA; University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics., Bamshad MJ.	Chong-JX-1	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2015-05-11-Chong-JX-1.pdf
2015-02-17	De novo mutations in NALCN cause a syndrome characterized by congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia, and developmental delay	Am J Hum Genet.	Freeman-Sheldon syndrome, or distal arthrogryposis type 2A (DA2A), is an autosomal-dominant condition caused by mutations in MYH3 and characterized by multiple congenital contractures of the face and limbs and normal cognitive development. We identified a subset of five individuals who had been putatively diagnosed with DA2A with severe neurological abnormalities and for whom congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia, and global developmental delay had resulted in early death in three cases; this is a unique condition that we now refer to as CLIFAHDD syndrome. Exome sequencing identified missense mutations in the sodium leak channel, non-selective (NALCN) in four families affected by CLIFAHDD syndrome. We used molecular-inversion probes to screen for NALCN in a cohort of 202 distal arthrogryposis (DA)-affected individuals as well as concurrent exome sequencing of six other DA-affected individuals, thus revealing NALCN mutations in ten additional families with atypical forms of DA. All 14 mutations were missense variants predicted to alter amino acid residues in or near the S5 and S6 pore-forming segments of NALCN, highlighting the functional importance of these segments. In vitro functional studies demonstrated that NALCN alterations nearly abolished the expression of wild-type NALCN, suggesting that alterations that cause CLIFAHDD syndrome have a dominant-negative effect. In contrast, homozygosity for mutations in other regions of NALCN has been reported in three families affected by an autosomal-recessive condition characterized mainly by hypotonia and severe intellectual disability. Accordingly, mutations in NALCN can cause either a recessive or dominant condition characterized by varied though overlapping phenotypic features, perhaps based on the type of mutation and affected protein domain(s).	Chong JX, McMillin MJ, Shively KM, Beck AE, Marvin CT, Armenteros JR, Buckingham KJ, Nkinsi NT, Boyle EA, Berry MN, Bocian M, Foulds N, Uzielli ML, Haldeman-Englert C, Hennekam RC, Kaplan P, Kline AD, Mercer CL, Nowaczyk MJ, Klein Wassink-Ruiter JS, McPherson EW, Moreno RA, et al. Chong-JX-2	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2015-05-11-Chong-JX-2.pdf
2015-02-06	Integrating sequence and array data to create an improved 1000 Genomes Project haplotype reference panel	Nat Commun.	A major use of the 1000 Genomes Project (1000 GP) data is genotype imputation in genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Here we develop a method to estimate haplotypes from low-coverage sequencing data that can take advantage of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray genotypes on the same samples. First the SNP array data are phased to build a backbone (or 'scaffold') of haplotypes across each chromosome. We then phase the sequence data 'onto' this haplotype scaffold. This approach can take advantage of relatedness between sequenced and non-sequenced samples to improve accuracy. We use this method to create a new 1000 GP haplotype reference set for use by the human genetic community. Using a set of validation genotypes at SNP and bi-allelic indels we show that these haplotypes have lower genotype discordance and improved imputation performance into downstream GWAS samples, especially at low-frequency variants.	Delaneau O, Marchini J; 1000 Genomes Project Consortium.; 1000 Genomes Project Consortium	Delaneau-O	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2015-02-06-Delaneau-O.pdf
2014-07-02	Human genomic regions with exceptionally high levels of population differentiation identified from 911 whole-genome sequences	Genome Biol.	Population differentiation has proved to be effective for identifying loci under geographically localized positive selection, and has the potential to identify loci subject to balancing selection. We have previously investigated the pattern of genetic differentiation among human populations at 36.8 million genomic variants to identify sites in the genome showing high frequency differences. Here, we extend this dataset to include additional variants, survey sites with low levels of differentiation, and evaluate the extent to which highly differentiated sites are likely to result from selective or other processes.	Colonna V, Ayub Q, Chen Y, Pagani L, Luisi P, Pybus M, Garrison E, Xue Y, Tyler-Smith C; 1000 Genomes Project Consortium., Abecasis GR, Auton A, Brooks LD, DePristo MA, Durbin RM, Handsaker RE, Kang HM, Marth GT, McVean GA	Colonna-V	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2014-07-02-Colonna-V.pdf
2013-10-05	Integrative annotation of variants from 1092 humans: application to cancer genomics	Science.	Interpreting variants, especially noncoding ones, in the increasing number of personal genomes is challenging. We used patterns of polymorphisms in functionally annotated regions in 1092 humans to identify deleterious variants; then we experimentally validated candidates. We analyzed both coding and noncoding regions, with the former corroborating the latter. We found regions particularly sensitive to mutations (ultrasensitive) and variants that are disruptive because of mechanistic effects on transcription-factor binding (that is, motif-breakers). We also found variants in regions with higher network centrality tend to be deleterious. Insertions and deletions followed a similar pattern to single-nucleotide variants, with some notable exceptions (e.g., certain deletions and enhancers). On the basis of these patterns, we developed a computational tool (FunSeq), whose application to ~90 cancer genomes reveals nearly a hundred candidate noncoding drivers.	Khurana E, Fu Y, Colonna V, Mu XJ, Kang HM, Lappalainen T, Sboner A, Lochovsky L, Chen J, Harmanci A, Das J, Abyzov A, Balasubramanian S, Beal K, Chakravarty D, Challis D, Chen Y, Clarke D, Clarke L, Cunningham F, Evani US, Flicek P, et al	Khurana-E	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2013-10-05-Khurana-E.pdf
2013-10-01	Genetic variants regulating immune cell levels in health and disease	Cell.	The complex network of specialized cells and molecules in the immune system has evolved to defend against pathogens, but inadvertent immune system attacks on self result in autoimmune disease. Both genetic regulation of immune cell levels and their relationships with autoimmunity are largely undetermined. Here, we report genetic contributions to quantitative levels of 95 cell types encompassing 272 immune traits, in a cohort of 1,629 individuals from four clustered Sardinian villages. We first estimated trait heritability, showing that it can be substantial, accounting for up to 87% of the variance (mean 41%). Next, by assessing _8.2 million variants that we identified and confirmed in an extended set of 2,870 individuals, 23 independent variants at 13 loci associated with at least one trait. Notably, variants at three loci (HLA, IL2RA, and SH2B3/ATXN2) overlap with known autoimmune disease associations. These results connect specific cellular phenotypes to specific genetic variants, helping to explicate their involvement in disease.	Orru V, Steri M, Sole G, Sidore C, Virdis F, Dei M, Lai S, Zoledziewska M, Busonero F, Mulas A, Floris M, Mentzen WI, Urru SA, Olla S, Marongiu M, Piras MG, Lobina M, Maschio A, Pitzalis M, Urru MF, Marcelli M, Cusano R, et al	Orru_V	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2013-10-01-Orru_V.pdf
2013-08-03	Low-pass DNA sequencing of 1200 Sardinians reconstructs European Y-chromosome phylogeny	Science.	Genetic variation within the male-specific portion of the Y chromosome (MSY) can clarify the origins of contemporary populations, but previous studies were hampered by partial genetic information. Population sequencing of 1204 Sardinian males identified 11,763 MSY single-nucleotide polymorphisms, 6751 of which have not previously been observed. We constructed a MSY phylogenetic tree containing all main haplogroups found in Europe, along with many Sardinian-specific lineage clusters within each haplogroup. The tree was calibrated with archaeological data from the initial expansion of the Sardinian population ~7700 years ago. The ages of nodes highlight different genetic strata in Sardinia and reveal the presumptive timing of coalescence with other human populations. We calculate a putative age for coalescence of ~180,000 to 200,000 years ago, which is consistent with previous mitochondrial DNA-based estimates.	Francalacci P, Morelli L, Angius A, Berutti R, Reinier F, Atzeni R, Pilu R, Busonero F, Maschio A, Zara I, Sanna D, Useli A, Urru MF, Marcelli M, Cusano R, Oppo M, Zoledziewska M, Pitzalis M, Deidda F, Porcu E, Poddie F, Kang HM, et al.	Francalacci-P	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2013-08-03-Francalacci-P.pdf
2012-11-07	An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human genomes	Nature.	By characterizing the geographic and functional spectrum of human genetic variation, the 1000 Genomes Project aims to build a resource to help to understand the genetic contribution to disease. Here we describe the genomes of 1,092 individuals from 14 populations, constructed using a combination of low-coverage whole-genome and exome sequencing. By developing methods to integrate information across several algorithms and diverse data sources, we provide a validated haplotype map of 38_million single nucleotide polymorphisms, 1.4_million short insertions and deletions, and more than 14,000 larger deletions. We show that individuals from different populations carry different profiles of rare and common variants, and that low-frequency variants show substantial geographic differentiation, which is further increased by the action of purifying selection. We show that evolutionary conservation and coding consequence are key determinants of the strength of purifying selection, that rare-variant load varies substantially across biological pathways, and that each individual contains hundreds of rare non-coding variants at conserved sites, such as motif-disrupting changes in transcription-factor-binding sites. This resource, which captures up to 98% of accessible single nucleotide polymorphisms at a frequency of 1% in related populations, enables analysis of common and low-frequency variants in individuals from diverse, including admixed, populations.	1000 Genomes Project Consortium., Abecasis GR, Auton A, Brooks LD, DePristo MA, Durbin RM, Handsaker RE, Kang HM, Marth GT, McVean GA	1000-Genomes-Project-Consortium	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2012-11-07-1000-Genomes-Project-Consortium.pdf
2006-07-18	PROTOGENE: turning amino acid alignments into bona fide CDS nucleotide alignments	Nucleic Acids Res.	We describe Protogene, a server that can turn a protein multiple sequence alignment into the equivalent alignment of the original gene coding DNA. Protogene relies on a pipeline where every initial protein sequence is BLASTed against RefSeq or NR. The annotation associated with potential matches is used to identify the gene sequence. This gene sequence is then aligned with the query protein using Exonerate in order to extract a coding nucleotide sequence matching the original protein. Protogene can handle protein fragments and will return every CDS coding for a given protein, even if they occur in different genomes. Protogene is available from http://www.tcoffee.org/	Moretti S, Reinier F, Poirot O, Armougom F, Audic S, Keduas V, Notredame C	Moretti-S	http://fred3ric.github.io/files/2006-07-18-Moretti-S.pdf
